[[!inline pages="Software/PulseAudio/TOC" quick="yes" raw="yes"]]

# PulseAudio 7.0 Release Notes (draft)

## Changes at a Glance

 * LFE channel synthesis with low-pass filtering
 * New libsoxr based resamplers
 * Socket activation support for TCP
 * The "srbchannel" IPC mechanism enabled by default
 * More flexible jack detection support when using UCM

## Notes for Application Developers

(nothing important happened)

## Notes for Packagers

There's a new optional dependency on libsoxr. The minimum supported version is 0.1.1. libsoxr is used for the soxr-mq, soxr-hq and soxr-vhq resamplers.

## Changes in More Detail

### LFE channel synthesis with low-pass filtering

When the speaker system has a subwoofer, it's often desirable to synthesize the LFE channel audio when the original audio content doesn't have a separate LFE channel. Previously PulseAudio supported doing that by simply feeding the average of all input channels to the LFE channel, but it's often better to filter out any high frequencies going to the subwoofer. That's now supported, and enabled by default.

The default value of "enable-lfe-remixing" in daemon.conf has changed from "false" to "true", and there's a new daemon.conf option for configuring the crossover frequency: "lfe-crossover-freq". The crossover filtering can be disabled by setting "lfe-crossover-freq" to zero, and if "enable-lfe-remixing" is "true", then the old LFE synthesis algorithm is used.

### New libsoxr based resamplers

There are three new libsoxr based resamplers available: soxr-mq, soxr-hq and soxr-vhq. Quality-wise all should be perfect (no audible distortions), but the hq and vhq variants can be used if "even more perfect" quality is desired. The libsoxr developers [[recommend|http://sox.sourceforge.net/Docs/FAQ]] the hq variant for bit depths up to 16 bits, and the vhq variant for higher bit depths (the internal processing happens with higher precision in the vhq variant). The statement that even the mq variant is "perfect" is based on Alexander E. Patrakov's measurements using a psychoacoustic model for determining whether any produced distortions are actually audible (they're not). The model is described in this paper: [[http://www.mp3-tech.org/programmer/docs/6_Heusdens.pdf]]

The mq and hq variants have better performance than speex-float-1 (the current default resampler). We would make soxr-mq the default resampler, if it wasn't for one significant drawback: the resamplers usually introduce up to around 20 ms of extra latency, and in some rare cases even more.

More discussion about the merits and shortcomings of the new resamplers can be found in this mailing list thread: [[http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.audio.pulseaudio.general/22158]]

Here are some benchmarking results: [[http://lastique.github.io/src_test/]]

### Socket activation support for TCP

The previous release introduced support for systemd socket activation for unix sockets. Now the support has been extended to cover TCP sockets as well. This allows PulseAudio to be started on-demand on headless servers, for example.

### The "srbchannel" IPC mechanism enabled by default

The "srbchannel" IPC mechanism, which improves efficiency particularly on low latency streams, was introduced in the previous release, but it was too buggy to be enabled by default at that time. Bugs have been fixed since, and now the feature is enabled by default.

### More flexible jack detection support when using UCM

Systems that use ALSA's UCM (use case manager) for describing the hardware can now configure the jack kcontrol for a device using the "JackControl" value. Previously, jack detection with UCM relied on implicit heuristics for the jack kcontrol name, which didn't always work well enough.

## git shortlog

<pre>
To be added later.
</pre>
