[[!inline pages="Software/PulseAudio/TOC" quick="yes" raw="yes"]]

# PulseAudio 8.0 release notes (draft)

## Changes at a glance

 * New LFE balance programming interface
 * More flexible configuration file handling
 * Various bug fixes and small improvements

## Notes for application developers

### New LFE balance programming interface

There's a new API for controlling the LFE (a.k.a. subwoofer) channel volume relative to all other (except mono and aux) channels.

Some background: the "native" volume representation in PulseAudio is to have independent volume for each channel, but some UIs may prefer to have one "overall volume" slider and two sliders for controlling the left-right and rear-front balances. There have always been helper functions for mapping the left-right and rear-front balances to per-channel volumes and vice versa. The LFE channel is not included in any of the conversions, however. To allow users to also control the LFE channel volume some UIs (at least the Gnome sound configuration tool) have added the LFE channel control as a separate slider, but in practice that had weird interactions with the overall volume slider.

To resolve this problem, we now have helper functions for controlling the balance between LFE and non-LFE channels, which allow changing the balance without affecting the overall volume. All applications that present the left-right and rear-front balances to the user are advised to start using the new API for dealing with the LFE volume.

The new functions are `pa_cvolume_get_lfe_balance`, `pa_cvolume_set_lfe_balance` and `pa_channel_map_can_lfe_balance`.

## Notes for packagers

### More flexible configuration file handling

The configuration files /etc/pulse/client.conf and /etc/pulse/daemon.conf can now be amended by creating files under /etc/pulse/client.conf.d and /etc/pulse/deamon.conf.d. This makes it easier for distributions to handle a situation where some configuration option should be set differently if a particular package is installed. Options set in the files installed in the .d directories override the options set in the main files.

### pulsecore-8.0.so moved to a private directory

pulsecore-X.Y.so used to be installed in the top level /usr/lib directory, but that was not a good place for it, since it's an internal library not meant for applications. The library is now installed under /usr/lib/pulseaudio.

## git shortlog

<pre>
To be added later.
</pre>
