

## HarfBuzz Hackfests

Major [[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]] development, specially the South / South-East Asian shaper, has happened in [[HarfBuzz Hackfests|Software/HarfBuzz/Hackfests]], intense week-long pair-programming hackathons between [[BehdadEsfahbod|BehdadEsfahbod]] and [[JonathanKew|JonathanKew]].  We have found that these quarterly events are a very productive way to develop [[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]], and as such looking to continue them.  Here's a timeline: 

* **Ngapi [[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]] Hackfest** February 2013, Google London / Mozilla London.  Implemented Win8-style Myanmar shaping, and Tai Tham, Cham, and New Tai Lue shaping, and fixed various bugs.  Read full [[report|http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/harfbuzz/2013-February/002952.html]], 
* **[[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]] "All-You-Can-Eat-Sushi" Hackfest** November 2012, Mozilla Vancouver.  Mostly fixed shaping with tricky / old / broken fonts for Sinhala, Khmer, and Thai, and started introspection APIs, 
* **Lemongrass [[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]] Hackfest** July 2012, Mozilla Toronto.  Further streamlines support for main Indic scripts and moved east-ward, adding support for Khmer.  Read full [[report|http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/harfbuzz/2012-July/002199.html]], 
* **[[HarfBuzz|HarfBuzz]] Massala Hackfest** May 2012, Google Zurich.  Serious work on the Indic shaper was started and a major milestone reached by the end of the week.  Read full [[report|http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/harfbuzz/2012-May/001988.html]], 
* May 2010, Reading, UK, 
* October 2009, Mozilla Toronto.  Read full [[report|http://mces.blogspot.ca/2009/11/harfbuzz-hackfest.html]], 
Before these hackfests, there were other gatherings under the umbrella of [[TextLayout|TextLayout]] summits. 
