
This page is not about getting new accounts.  If you do not currently have a fd.o account, see [[AccountRequests|AccountRequests]]. 


# Account Maintenance

freedesktop.org uses a user management system entitled userdir-ldap.  More information on ud-l can be found at [[Debian's information page|http://db.debian.org/doc-mail.html]]. 

This page describes the mail interface, which assumes you have a GPG key attached to your account.  If this is not the case, please file a bug on [[the Account Changes component|https://bugs.freedesktop.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=freedesktop.org]] in Bugzilla first, with your GPG key attached as a text/plain file, and noting the account which the key should be attached to.  Please also make sure it's visible on the subkeys.pgp.net keyserver. 

The web interface is not operational at this time. 


## Adding/removing SSH keys

The mail gateway maintains SSH keys by _replacing_ all keys with the contents of the mail.  Send the mail, GPG-signed, each key on a new line: 
[[!format txt """
cat ~/.ssh/key1.pub ~/.ssh/key2.pub ~/.ssh/key3.pub | gpg --clearsign | mail change@db.freedesktop.org
"""]]
You will receive a mail back within a few minutes confirming your changes.  Note again that this replaces the entire list of keys: following the example above, if you previously had key1 and key4 active, the new set would be key1, key2, and key3: key4 would be excluded.  Note that this is important as password logins are not available on freedesktop.org. 

**Only RSA keys are accepted!** Due to security reasons relating to an OpenSSL vulnerability, DSA keys (as well as legacy RSA1 keys) will not be accepted. 

**Note: Your total key length must be <=1024 characters in ascii, hence anything longer than a 4096bit key will not work** 

**Note2: If you get the error: "Message Error: Verification of signature failed" your email is probably being line wrapped, try a different client** 

**Note3: If you never get a reply back, make sure your return address is actually valid.** 
## Changing email address


[[!format txt """
echo 'emailforward: new@address.com' | gpg --clearsign | mail change@db.freedesktop.org
"""]]

## Getting a copy of your current details


[[!format txt """
echo 'show' | gpg --clearsign | mail change@db.freedesktop.org
"""]]
Your LDAP record will be mailed back to you, GPG-encrypted.  Most of these details can be changed by sending the same string back to [[change@db.freedesktop.org|mailto:change@db.freedesktop.org]], e.g.: 


[[!format txt """
echo 'gecos: Full Name' | gpg --clearsign | mail change@db.freedesktop.org
"""]]