## Getting Involved in freedesktop.org

freedesktop.org is always looking for more involvement. Remember that freedesktop.org is a project for developers interested in working on shared desktop code, specifications, or documentation. 

<a name="MailingLists"></a> 
### Mailing Lists

If you're interested in working on specifications, the best way to get started is to join our mailing list; mail [[xdg-request@lists.freedesktop.org|mailto:xdg-request@lists.freedesktop.org]] with the word "subscribe" in the subject of your email. xdg-list has archives and on-the-web subscription [[here|http://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo/xdg]]. 

For other mailing lists and archives, go [[here|http://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo]]. 

Again, because this is important: XDG is not a diplomacy project, we want to actually work on specifications rather than discussing what the specifications could contain. Whenever possible, discussion on xdg should focus on a concrete _draft specification_ or _existing code_. It's best to post a draft of a document, or go ahead and code something up, rather than asking for comments on an abstract topic. 

For general freedesktop.org discussion, please mail [[freedesktop@lists.freedesktop.org|mailto:freedesktop@lists.freedesktop.org]]. 


### Source Code: Subversion

A few FD.o projects use Subversion as their revision control system. Developer access is possible using <svn+ssh://<user>@svn.freedesktop.org/svn/<project>>. And then there's WebSVN, too at <http://websvn.freedesktop.org/>. TODO: is there anonsvn available at all? 

<a name="GIT"></a> 
### Source Code: Git

Several X.org projects have been moved to the git revision control system.  See [[UsingGit|UsingGit]] for more information on using git. 

Read-only [[Git|http://git.or.cz/]] repositories are hosted at <git://git.freedesktop.org> Each project may create a repository on git.freedesktop.org in `/srv/git.freedesktop.org` using `GIT_DIR=/srv/git.freedesktop.org/{project}.git git-init-db` and then they can push commits to that tree with git-push. 

<a name="CVS"></a> 
### Source Code: CVS

Anonymous CVS is available from: 

    cvs -d:pserver:anoncvs@anoncvs.freedesktop.org:/cvs/<project> login
    cvs -d:pserver:anoncvs@anoncvs.freedesktop.org:/cvs/<project> co <module>

You can browse the modules via web at [[http://webcvs.freedesktop.org|http://webcvs.freedesktop.org]]. 

**Beware**: for projects that have moved to git, the source code in CVS is out of date. 

CVS commits can be monitored on a per-project basis.  See the project's page for more info. 

See [[UsingCvs]] for help with developer CVS access.  Check out the [[MAINTAINERS|http://webcvs.freedesktop.org/xorg/doc/xorg-docs/MAINTAINERS?view=markup]] list for information about which lists or which people to contact about a given piece of software. 

If you have some code that may be of cross-desktop interest, we're happy to host it on our CVS server, and you may want to bring it up for discussion on xdg-list. Mail [[the fd.o admins|mailto:sitewranglers@lists.freedesktop.org]] with requests for CVS access; be sure to include a pointer to the work you want to put in CVS. 

<a name="Bugzilla"></a> 
### Bugzilla

The freedesktop.org bugzilla can be found on <http://bugs.freedesktop.org>. 

<a name="Translations"></a> 
### Translations

See the [[Translations]] page to find out where you can contribute translations for some freedesktop.org packages. 

<a name="IRC"></a> 
### IRC

Join us on #freedesktop on [[freenode|http://freenode.net/]]. 

<a name="Wiki"></a> 
### Wiki

Active work on this website is found at [[RecentChanges]].  Work to be done on the website can be found in [[WantedPages]] and [[OrphanedPages]]. 
