

## Setting your UserPreferences

You may self-register and establish your preferences by clicking on the [[UserPreferences|UserPreferences]] link at the top right corner of every page.  If you have registered and are logged in, your name will be displayed instead of "User``Preferences". 

The various fields in User``Preferences are described below: 

* **Name**: Either your real name or an alias. Best is to use [[WikiName|WikiName]] format. 
   * If ACLs are enabled, it is **required** to be a unique [[WikiName|WikiName]]. 
* **Password**: Something you can remember but is very hard for friends and family to guess. 
* **Password repeat**: if you initially set or later change your password, repeat it here to avoid typos. 
* **Email**: Your email address, this is required if you wish to subscribe to wiki pages or wish to have a forgotten login data mailed to you. 
   * If ACLs are enabled, the email address is required to be unique and valid. 
* **Preferred theme**: choose a theme to change colours, icons and layout of the wiki 
* **User CSS URL**: If you want to override some of the wiki system's css, put your own CSS here. 
* **Editor size**: [!] This controls the size of the text area when you edit a page. Adjust this to suit the size of your monitor and your personal preferences. 
* **Time zone**: ... 
      * **Your time is**: If the correct time is not displayed, use the drop down box and select the correct time. 
      * **Server time is**: Displays the server time. 
* **Date format**: The default of year-month-day is least confusing for international use. 
* **Preferred language**: The default is taken from your browser setting. It is advisable to set this to a specific language anyway, since then you get notification mails in your native tongue, too. 
* **General options**: ... 
      * **Add spaces to displayed wiki names**: If checked, makes **Wiki``Names** look like **Wiki Names**. 
      * **Open editor on double click**: Handy if you edit a lot of pages. 
      * **Remember last page visited**: When you point your browser at the wiki's base URL (i.e. the one not mentioning a specific page), you will see the last page visited. This can be useful if you are frequently reading or editing a single page. 
      * **Remember login information forever**: When you set this, the cookie won't expire at midnight. 
      * **Show emoticons**: A fun thing, see /!\ and ;-) instead of `/!\` and `;-)`. 
      * **Show fancy diffs**: Makes diffs more readable. 
      * **Show fancy links**: Show the little icons that indicate the type of link,  for WWW,  for FTP, and so on. 
      * **Show icon toolbar**: Provides a row of icon links in the upper right corner. 
      * **Show question mark for non-existing pagelinks**: Display a highlighted **?** in front of a non-existant page instead of a color-coded page name. 
      * **Show page trail**: Lists the last five pages visited at the top of the page, so you can jump back several pages easily. 
      * **Show top/bottom links in headings**: If checked, every title bar will have an up and down arrow to navigate to top or bottom of page. 
* **Quick links**: Overrides the standard choices in the gray navigation bar at the top of the page.  Enter one Wiki page name per line. You may also add free-form links, i.e. entries of the form `[url linktext]` just like in wiki pages. 
* **Subscribed wiki pages (one regex per line)**: Enter **`.*`** to receive an email when any page in this Wiki changes (_not recommended_ for busy wikis), or enter the names of any individual pages, one per line.  If you are familiar with **regular expressions**, you may enter a regex expression to match the pages names of interest (.* matches all page names). With the **Show icon toolbar** option checked, subscription to individual pages is made easy by clicking the envelope icon when viewing a page of interest. /!\ This is an optional feature that only works when email support has enabled for this wiki, see [[HelpOnConfiguration/EmailSupport|HelpOnConfiguration/EmailSupport]] for details. 