

## Actions

Actions are tools that work on a page or the whole wiki, but unlike macros do not add _to_ the page content when viewing a page, but work _on_ that page content. They either produce some output based on page contents (navigational actions like searching) or implement functions that are not related to viewing a page (like deleting or renaming a page). 

There is a set of system-defined actions, which includes page editing; you can extend the set of known actions by your own ones. See [[HelpForDevelopers|HelpForDevelopers]] for more on that. 

The following actions are added to the list of user-defined extension actions at the bottom of each page. This happens to any mixed-case extension, for other actions (all lower-case) see the list further down this page. Some of these action might not be available for your wiki site. 

* `AttachFile`: attach files to a page, see [[/AttachFile|HelpOnActions/AttachFile]] for more details. 
* `DeletePage`: Delete a page, after you confirmed it; deletion means a final backup copy is created and only then the page is deleted, i.e. you can _revive_ the page later on (as long as the backups are not physically deleted). 
* `RenamePage`: Rename a page, after you confirmed it. 
* `LikePages`: list pages whose title starts or ends with the same [[!MeatBall WikiWord desc="WikiWord"]] as the current page title. 
* `LocalSiteMap`: show nearby links of the current page, i.e. list all referred-to pages, and in turn their references, to a certain limited depth. 
* `SpellCheck`: call the spell checker for the current page; see [[HelpOnSpellCheck|HelpOnSpellCheck]] for more. 
The following is a list of _internal_ actions that are used to implement the various icons and links at the top and bottom of pages, or supplement certain macros. 

* titleindex: Implements the listing of all page names as text or ([[?action=titleindex|?action=titleindex]]) or XML ([[?action=titleindex&mimetype=text/xml);|?action=titleindex&mimetype=text/xml);]] the main use of this action is to enable [[!MeatBall MetaWiki desc="MetaWiki"]]. 
* fullsearch: this action is triggered by clicking on the "Go" button of the `FullSearch` macro ([[?action=fullsearch&value=HelpOnActions|?action=fullsearch&value=HelpOnActions]]). 
* titlesearch: this action is triggered by clicking on the "Go" button of the `TitleSearch` macro ([[?action=titlesearch&value=HelpOnActions|?action=titlesearch&value=HelpOnActions]]). 
* inlinesearch: this implements the inline search for the form fields at the bottom of each page (note that this uses POST requests, so you won't normally see this action in URLs). 
* highlight: highlight the search word when you click on a link in a search result list. 
* diff: display differences between page revisions. 
* info: show meta-data on a page. 
* recall: display an older revision of a page. 
* show: display a page (the default action). 
* refresh: refresh the cached version of a page (currently only used on XSLT-formatted pages). 
* print: show the print-view of a page, which omits the navigational items from the display view. 
* edit: edit this page. 
* savepage: save this page (do not ever use this manually). 
* subscribe: subscribe to a page. 
* userform: save user preferences. 
* bookmark: set bookmark for [[RecentChanges|RecentChanges]]. 
* raw: send the raw wiki markup as text/plain (e.g. for backup purposes via wget); [[SystemInfo?action=raw|SystemInfo?action=raw]] shows the markup of [[SystemInfo|SystemInfo]]. 
* format: emit specially formatted views of a page. 
* rss_rc: generate a RSS feed of [[RecentChanges|RecentChanges]]. 
* chart: display charts. 
* export: export the wiki content. _[experimental]_ 
* content: for transclusion into static web pages, this action emits the pure page content, without any <html>, <head>, or <body> tags. 
* links: generates a list of all pages and the links on them, just like [[!MeatBall LinkDatabase desc="LinkDatabase"]]. 
* xmlrpc: Wiki XML-RPC interface, see [[!MeatBall XmlRpcToWiki desc="XmlRpcToWiki"]]. 
* revert: revert to an older version of the page. 
* macro: execute a helper action in an external macro. 