
[[HelpContents|HelpContents]] > [[HelpOnAdministration|HelpOnAdministration]] > HelpOnInstalling 

[[!toc ]] 


## How to install your own MoinMoin Wiki

This page describes the installation procedure applying to [[MoinMoin|MoinMoin]] version 1.1 and up. In the next section, there is a list of real-world [[Installation Scenarios|HelpOnInstalling]] that help you to understand how to apply the instructions in different environments. If you already have a wiki running and want to upgrade, see [[HelpOnUpdating|HelpOnUpdating]].  

[[/BasicInstallation|HelpOnInstalling/BasicInstallation]] explains the "`setup.py`" step of the installation in more detail. This applies equally to all scenarios, and you should read it before trying a live installation. 

[[/TroubleShooting|HelpOnInstalling/TroubleShooting]] helps with fixing any general problems you might encounter, which apply to any installation platform.  

After a successful installation, you might want to read more about configuration and other options that you, as the wiki administrator, can set up. [[HelpOnAdministration|HelpOnAdministration]] contains links to pages that cover these topics. Especially, the [[HelpOnConfiguration|HelpOnConfiguration]] and [[HelpOnUpdating|HelpOnUpdating]] pages provide additional information regarding wiki setup and maintenance. [[!MoinMoin MoinMoinWinCvs desc="MoinMoinWinCvs"]] and [[!MoinMoin MoinMoinUnixCvs desc="MoinMoinUnixCvs"]] describe how to run your wiki using the current development version from the [[!MoinMoin SourceForge desc="SourceForge"]] CVS repository. 
[[!table header="no" class="mointable" data="""
 Please **make sure** that you do **not** accidently put your wiki's **`data/`** directory under a directory directly accessible by your web server (like below document root). Or at least forbid your web server serving anything below `data/` to a user - this is neither needed nor wanted! Your web server needs to serve moin.cgi and the stuff below htdocs **only**. 
"""]]

<a name="installscenarios"></a> 
### Sample Installation Scenarios

The following subpages will show you concrete examples of installation sessions, showing the commands used and explaining what they do. It is highly recommended that you _first_ read the general information on installing (especially the next section of this page) before choosing an installation scenario that best fits your intended use of [[MoinMoin|MoinMoin]]. 

UNIX: 

* [[/ApacheOnUnix|HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnUnix]] 
Windows: 

* [[/ApacheOnWin32|HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnWin32]] 
* [[/InternetInformationServer|HelpOnInstalling/InternetInformationServer]] 
Macintosh: 

* [[/ApacheOnMacOsx|HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnMacOsx]] 
Long-Running-Process Setup: 

* [[/ApacheWithFastCgi|HelpOnInstalling/ApacheWithFastCgi]] 
* [[/ApacheWithModPython|HelpOnInstalling/ApacheWithModPython]] 
* [[/TwistedWeb|HelpOnInstalling/TwistedWeb]] 