

## Creating a New Page


### Blankpage

Before all, you have to create a blank page using a [[WikiName|WikiName]] or other internal blank link. 


### Using WikiName s

To create a page, add its [[WikiName|WikiName]] to an existing page and save it.  


### Using other internal links

You can create a page too using  
[[!format txt """
 ["newpagename"]
"""]]
to an existing page, save it and fill the blank page just created. 


### Subpages

On details on how to create and link to subpages, see [[HelpOnEditing/SubPages|HelpOnEditing/SubPages]].  


### Filling

After that, you can click on it on the revised page, since it automatically becomes a hyperlink. 

You will then be presented with your new page, which you can edit in the normal way. After you _first_ saved it, it will be automatically created. Pages normally[^1] cannot be deleted, so be sure to spell new [[WikiName|WikiName]]****s correctly. 


## Creating and Using Template Pages

To create a template, follow the above description and create a page with a name ending in "**Template**"[^2]. This page will then be added to the list of template pages displayed when you try to show a non-existant page. For example, [[NonExistantHelpPage|NonExistantHelpPage]] has a link to [[HelpTemplate|HelpTemplate]] that loads the content of [[HelpTemplate|HelpTemplate]] into the editor box, when you click on that link. 


## Variable Substitution when Saving a Page

<a name="variablesubstitution"></a> The following variables are substituted when a page is _finally_ saved. Note that they'll appear unreplaced in the preview! 
[[!table header="no" class="mointable" data="""
 @****PAGE@      |  Name of the page (useful for template pages) 
 @****DATE@      |  Current date in the system's format 
 @****TIME@      |  Current date and time in the user's format 
 @****USERNAME@  |  Just the user's name (or his domain/IP) 
 @****USER@      |  Signature "-- loginname" 
 @****SIG@       |  Dated Signature "-- loginname date time" 
 @****MAILTO@    |  A fancy mailto: link with the user's data 
"""]]

Note that saving template or form definition pages and using preview does _not_ expand variables. Other than that, variable expansion is very global and happens anywhere on the page, including code displays, comments, processing instructions and other "special" areas of a page you might think are excluded. 


# Editor backup

If the user has a homepage[^3] indicated by the  icon, a backup of save/preview text is saved either as subpage `Home``Page``Name/Moin``Editor``Backup` (if subpages are allowed) or as page `Home``Page``Name``Moin``Editor``Backup` (if subpages are not allowed). 

So if you preview often, you will keep your changes, even if your browser crashes. 

Remark: this used to be an attachment to the homepage named `moin-editor-backup.txt`, but that was changed with introduction of Access``Control``Lists (see [[HelpOnAccessControlLists|HelpOnAccessControlLists]]) due to security problems. 


[^1] Deleting pages can be activated by the wiki administrator (which you'll normally do in intranet sites only).
[^2] If the wiki administrator changed the default settings, rules for what names are template pages might be different.
[^3] Having a homepage means you're logged in under a name that is also the name of an existing wiki page.
