
There are two main ways to run and debug Xegl. Over a network or using two video cards in the same machine. I use the two video card method. 


## Two video card method

* I run the normal X server on a PCI Rage128 AIW card. My target hardware is an AGP Radeon 9000. This script will set all of the devices up correctly. vbios.vm86 is my hacked tool for resetting a secondary video card using it VBIOS ROM. I run with the drm-no-root patch so all of the devices need to have their permissions set so that a normal user can access them. A some point PAM will do this automatically. The sleep is necessary in order to give udev time to build the device nodes. [[!format txt """
#!/bin/sh
vbios.vm86
rmmod radeonfb
rmmod fb
rmmod radeon
rmmod drm
modprobe radeon debug=1
insmod /home/mesa/drm/linux-core/drm.ko debug=1
insmod /home/mesa/drm/linux-core/radeon.ko
sleep 2
chmod 666 /sys/class/graphics/fb0/*
chmod 755 /sys/class/graphics/fb0/device
chmod 666 /dev/input/*
chmod 666 /dev/dri/*
"""]]Next make sure your paths are ok and run Xegl. I don't bother installing mesa so I run it directly out of the build tree. [[!format txt """
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/home/mesa/lib:/opt/xegl/lib
$ /opt/xegl/bin/Xegl :1 -ac -screen 1024x768
"""]]Now you can use any normal debugger to work on Xegl. I am using gdb and kdevelop. You can also run a window manager and some apps. [[!format txt """
$ DISPLAY=:1 metacity
$ DISPLAY=:1 xclock
"""]]

## Two machine and a net method

* In this method each machine has a single video card and remote gdb is used. I don't work this way so maybe  someone else will contribute a description. 


---

 
#### Jon Smirl - Aug 8, 2005
