

## Introduction

The `aes1660` driver supports devices based on the Authen``Tec AES1660 chipset. 

aes1660 is part of [[libfprint|Software/fprint/libfprint]] and is developed by Vasily Khoruzhick. 


## Supported devices

This device can most commonly be found embedded in some laptops, standalone USB device exists.  


## Driver history

Vasily Khoruzhick wrote this driver based on bus traffic analysis and comparison with other Authen``Tec drivers. Bus traffic logs were provided by Andreas Loos. aes1660 shares almost all code with [[aes2660|Software/fprint/libfprint/aes2660]] driver, they only differ in init sequences and image width. 


## Device operation

This is a swipe-type device which is similar to other Authen``Tec devices. Each frame is 128x8 pixels in size. 


## Security notes

The fingerprint is always sent unencrypted over the USB bus. Device can encrypt image, but it's not supported. According to traffic logs, control traffic (commands) is never encrypted. 


## Imaging performance

Image processing works well -- fingerprint image quality is good, the enhanced/binarized version is also good, and minutiae detection is accurate. However, this being a small sensor, a relatively small area of the finger is detected, and hence not that many minutiae. This results in low match scores, the threshold of which has been dropped to 25. 

Obtaining a good enrollment scan helps the matching performance a lot. It's usable but not brilliant -- false rejections are currently a little more common than we would like. 
