##META:TOPICINFO{author`"RichardWorth" date`"1083636093" format`"1.0" version`"1.5"}%
##META:TOPICPARENT{name="clipart"}%
= [[clipart][Open Clip Art Project]] =

== First Meeting ==

=== Monday 3-May, 10pm Eastern / 7pm Pacific (02:00 UTC Tue) in #openclipart ===

All are invited. Please join us for a meeting to discuss some Open Clip Art Project issues.

Monday, 3-May 10:00pm Eastern / 7:00pm Pacific (02:00 UTC Tue) in #openclipart on !FreeNode.

The formal discussion will last for one hour, but freeform discussion will continue after that time (yes, we know many are busy and have to be with families, etc).

This page will serve as a suggestion box for possible discussion items.

After we get enough suggestions, on Sunday we will make a more time conscious schedule for discussion.

=== Proposed Agenda (in this order) ===
	
	* Introductions
	* Meeting Times and Next Meeting
	* Who are we? (as in who and how many are our members?)
	* Project Name
	* Scope/Mission
	* File Formats
	* Submission Process
	* Metadata / Categories and Searching / File Names and Folder Names
	* Roadmap

=== Additional Discussion Items (time permitting, or for after-meeting conversation) ===
	* Branding (colors, style, logo, slogan)
	* Consistent and future-proof URLs
	* Status of switching to new Wiki, Forums?, bug-tracking tool

-- Main.JonPhillips - 30 Apr 2004

-- Main.RichardWorth - 01 May 2004
