

## icon-slicer

icon-slicer is a utility for generating icon themes and libXcursor cursor themes. 

The inputs to icon-slicer are conceptually:  

                     * 1 A set of multi-layer images, one for each size. 2 A XML theme description file 
Each image contains all the cursors arranged in a grid; For cursors the layers are:  

                     * A layer with a dot for the hotspot of each cursor 
                     * The main image or first animation frame for multi-frame animated cursors 
                     * The second animation frame for multi-frame animated cursors 
                     * ... 
For icons, the layers are:  

                     * A layer with the images 
                     * An optional layer with attachment points for emblems 
                     * An optional layer with boxes for embedding text into icons. 
In practice, since loading of multilayer images is not supported by standard image libraries, each layer is input as a separate image file.  

The theme description file contains, among other things, information about the source images to read, the location of each named cursor or icon within the grid, and a set of aliases from names to other names.  

Compiling icon slicer requires [[GTK+-2.x|ftp://ftp.gtk.org/pub/gtk/v2.2/]] (for gdk-pixbuf) and [[popt|ftp://ftp.rpm.org/pub/rpm/dist/rpm-4.2.x/]] to compile. 


### CVS

The [[CVS|GettingInvolved]] module for this spec is "icon-slicer".  


### Documentation

The [[README|http://freedesktop.org/software/icon-slicer/README]] file contains information about the file format, and command line invocation. 


### Download

                     * [[icon-slicer-0.3.tar.gz|http://freedesktop.org/software/icon-slicer/releases/icon-slicer-0.3.tar.gz]]: Initial release. 
