

# Your Office Suite

ooo-build is a project focused on creating Better, Faster, and Freer Office Suite - [[Your Office Suite|http://www.go-oo.org/]]. 

[[!toc ]] 


# Developers


## Getting the sources

ooo-build sources are stored in [[git|http://git-scm.com/]].  To get them, you can use: 
[[!format txt """
git clone git://anongit.freedesktop.org/git/ooo-build/ooo-build
"""]]
If you want to learn more, please see the [[GettingIt|Software/ooo-build/GettingIt]] pages. 


## Building it

Once the source has been checked out, ooo-build can be built in very nearly the usual manner: 
[[!format txt """
cd ooo-build
./autogen.sh --with-distro=DISTRO
./download
make 
"""]]
where DISTRO is the basename of a file in the distro-configs directory, such as Debian, SUSE, or Ubuntu. 

For more info please see the [[BuildingIt|Software/ooo-build/BuildingIt]] page. 


## Hacking it

Once your build finishes, it's time to do a developer installation, and  start hacking: 
[[!format txt """
make dev-install
# check that it works
cd build/install/program
source ooenv
./soffice
"""]]
See the [[HackingIt|Software/ooo-build/HackingIt]] page to see how you can do it. 


## Debugging it

For some debugging tips, please see the [[DebuggingIt|Software/ooo-build/DebuggingIt]] page. 


## Contributing

Once you have done a change that you are happy with, and that builds with ooo-build, contribute it back, we'll be happy to integrate it!  Do: 
[[!format txt """
# commit your changes to your local repository
git commit -a
# create the patch
git format-patch origin/master
"""]]
and send the resulting patch to the [[ooo-build@lists.freedesktop.org|mailto:ooo-build@lists.freedesktop.org]] mailing list. 

More information can be found on the [[Contributing|Software/ooo-build/Contributing]] page. 


# Google Summer of Code

ooo-build participates in the [[Google Summer of Code|Software/ooo-build/SummerOfCode]], please have a look at [[this year's ideas|Software/ooo-build/SummerOfCode/2010]]. 


# Maintainers

Meet the [[ooo-build developers|http://www.go-oo.org/about/]] - either on the mailing list [[ooo-build@lists.freedesktop.org|mailto:ooo-build@lists.freedesktop.org]], or on IRC, channel #go-oo or irc.freenode.net. 

If you are one of the ooo-build developers/maintainers - find out how to update the webpages, and similar stuff [[here|Software/ooo-build/Maintainers]]. 
