

# urfkill

For the laptop and mobile devices users, the management of the radio killswitches is important for the connectivity and power consumption. [[HAL|Software/hal]] used to take care of this job, but it is now [[deprecated|http://lists.freedesktop.org/archives/hal/2008-May/011560.html]]. The urfkill project is created to fill the gap and to provide more flexible configuration for the rfkill-related function keys. 


## Download

The latest release is 0.3.0 and can be downloaded from [[github|https://github.com/downloads/lcp/urfkill/urfkill-0.3.0.tar.xz]]. 

Development happens in [[git|GettingInvolved]].  There is a [[web interface|https://github.com/lcp/urfkill/]] to the repository. 


## Documentation

The documents of the D-Bus API and liburfkill-glib can be found [[here|http://lcp.github.com/urfkill-doc/]]. 


### HowTo

[[How to launch urfkill during system boot|Software/urfkill/HowToLaunch]] 


## Known Issues

* For Lenovo Thinkpad X200, the bluetooth killswitch (hci0) sometimes was soft-blocked after turning on bluetooth.  

Solution: set "force_sync" to true in /etc/urfkill/urfkill.conf 

* The bluetooth killswitches cannot be controlled by urfkilld in Lenovo [[ThinkPad|ThinkPad]] laptops. 

The states of the bluetooth killswitches in [[ThinkPad|ThinkPad]] are maintained by the kernel platform drivers, i.e. thinkpad_acpi, and urfkilld has no way to change it. 

Solution: please leave them alone. 


## Bugs

Please mail to Gary Lin ([[glin@suse.com|mailto:glin@suse.com]]) and Joey Lee ([[jlee@suse.com|mailto:jlee@suse.com]]) or poke me (glin) on #udev/irc.freenode.net 


## Client

* [[rfkiller|https://github.com/lcp/rfkiller]] - a gnome-extension which utilizes urfkill to manage killswitches. 


## TODO

* Provide a policy for the user to setup rfkill control rules when catching WLAN/BT/3G keycodes. 
* Integrate with GUI to provide power consumption function to user, e.g. 
         * Killswitch-Manager 
         * killswitch-applet 
         * python-killswitch 


---

 [[CategoryHalReplacement|CategoryHalReplacement]] 
