# xdg-utils

xdg-utils is a set of tools that allows applications to easily
integrate with the desktop environment of the user, regardless of the
specific desktop environment that the user runs.

About half of the tools focus on tasks commonly required during the
installation of a desktop application and the other half focuses on
integration with the desktop environment while the application is
running.

## Download

* [xdg-utils-1.1.0-rc3.tar.gz](http://portland.freedesktop.org/download/xdg-utils-1.1.0-rc3.tar.gz)

Also see the
[git repository](http://cgit.freedesktop.org/xdg/xdg-utils/) for the
latest development.

## Included utilities

* xdg-desktop-menu - Install desktop menu items
* xdg-desktop-icon - Install icons on the user's desktop
* xdg-icon-resource - Install icon resources
* xdg-mime - Gather MIME information about a file
* xdg-open - Open a URL in the user's preferred application that
  handles the respective URL or file type
* xdg-email - Open the user's preferred email client, potentially with
  subject and other info filled in
* xdg-screensaver - Enable, disable, or suspend the screensaver
* xdg-settings - Get various settings (default web browser) from the
  desktop environment

## Using xdg-utils

Although we expect that these scripts will generally come as part
of the operating system, we recommend that you package the scripts
that your application needs along with your product as a fallback.

We recommend that you place these scripts in a directory, and then add
that directory to the end of the `PATH`.  So, let's say that you're
writing your post installation script, and you want to create a menu
on any XDG compliant environment.  Let's further assume that
you've just installed to `$INSTALL_DIR`, and that your menu desktop
file is in `$INSTALL_DIR/mycompany-myapp.desktop`.  Finally, let's say
that you've included the xdg-utils package in your installation in
`$INSTALL_DIR/xdg-utils`.

Then a simple post install script could look like this:

    export PATH=$PATH:$INSTALL_DIR/xdg-utils/scripts
    xdg-desktop-menu install $INSTALL_DIR/mycompany-myapp.desktop

And now your product has a menu on any XDG compliant desktop!

Note that we strongly recommend using this method - that is, putting
your copy of the xdg-utils at the end of the path, and then invoking
them without a specific path name. That will allow your users and
their system providers to use custom versions of the xdg-utils to
adjust for system specific differences.

If you wish to absolutely force the issue and only use the versions
you shipped, you could instead hard code the path to the version
you bundle with your application.  We strongly recommend against
this, as it will make your product obsolete more quickly than is
necessary.

## Development

Development takes place in the
[git repository](http://cgit.freedesktop.org/xdg/xdg-utils/).  There
is also a
[mailing list](http://lists.freedesktop.org/mailman/listinfo/portland).

## Bugs

Bugs in xdg-utils can be reported to
[the freedesktop.org bugzilla](https://bugs.freedesktop.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=Portland&component=xdg-utils).

