

# DBPC Servers : specification, interfaces and methods description

[[DBPC|Specifications/DBPC]] 

[[!toc 2]]  


## Introduction

A DBPC server is a D-Bus service offering communication facilities with industrial equipement.   


## Servers type

Server can be mandatory for a field bus, protocol or electronic equipment :  

      * **Field bus or protocol based servers** allow retrieving tags value trough a communication interface and make those values available, thanks to D-bus, trough a DBPC server.  
      * **Electronic device based server** are generally supplied by manufacturers which would provide a standardized interface for there equipments within Linux systems.  

## D-bus service bus name

D-Bus service name of DBPC server begin always with "org.dbpc.". Usually server name correspond to the corresponding protocol. (example: org.dbpc.modbustcp)  

An other name can be choose with option -n   


## Servers configuration file

By default, configuration file is stored in "/etc/dbpc/". Configuration file has the same name than the D-Bus service name, folowed by ".conf". (example: modbustcp.conf)  

Another file can be choose with option -f   


## Server methods


[[!format txt """
<!DOCTYPE node PUBLIC "-//freedesktop//DTD D-BUS Object Introspection 1.0//EN"
"http://www.freedesktop.org/standards/dbus/1.0/introspect.dtd">
<node name="/org/dbpc/server">

  <interface name="org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable">
    <method name="Introspect">
      <arg direction="out" type="s" />
    </method>
  </interface>

  <interface name="org.dbpc.server">
    <method name="get_state">
      <arg direction="in"  type="v" name="variant" />
      <arg direction="out" type="s" />
    </method>
  </interface>

</node>
"""]]

## Server implementation name

Server implementations are usually named with the field bus or protocol designation, optionally followed by a specific name or identifier and finishing with "DBPC server". (example: ModbusTCP_..._DBPCserver) 

Generic server may be only called with a specific name or identifier followed by "DBPCserver". 

Electronic equipment server name usually begin with manufacturer name followed by model designation and finish with "DBPC_server". (example: Wago_750-863_DBPCserver) 
