
[[!toc ]] 


## Getting the sources

ooo-build sources are stored in [[git|http://git-scm.com/]].  To clone the latest version of ooo-build, please use: 
[[!format txt """
git clone git://anongit.freedesktop.org/git/ooo-build/ooo-build
"""]]
Registered developers should use the following command to enable writing to the repository: 
[[!format txt """
git clone ssh://[username@]git.freedesktop.org/git/ooo-build/ooo-build
"""]]
If you [[asked for your account|Software/ooo-build/AccountRequestCheatSheet]], but did not get one yet, just clone from the anonymous repository, you can commit and update (`git pull -r`) immediately, and push the changes later when you have the read/write access.  You can also [[send the changes by mail|Software/ooo-build/Contributing]].  To change your anonymous clone into a read/write (after you got the write access), change the URL in .git/config from the anonymous URL to the read/write. 

To learn how to build your fresh ooo-build clone, continue with the [[BuildingIt|Software/ooo-build/BuildingIt]] pages. 


## Basic instructions

Please check our **[[SVN to git cheat sheet|Software/ooo-build/SVNToGitCheatSheet]]** for quick reference.  You might be also interested in [[git/hg cheat sheet|http://mercurial.selenic.com/wiki/GitConcepts#Command_equivalence_table]] if you are more a Mercurial person, or if you want to up-stream something. 


## Getting a particular branch

When you have cloned the repository, you can switch to any branch you need.  The bleeding edge development happens in _master_, which is what you get when you clone the repository.  To switch eg. to branch _ooo-build-3-2-1_, do: 
[[!format txt """
git checkout -b ooo-build-3-2-1 origin/ooo-build-3-2-1
"""]]
This exactly means "please create a local branch ooo-build-3-2-1 that tracks what's happening in the remote branch ooo-build-3-2-1".  You can get a list of all the available remote branches using _git branch -r_. 

Once you have created the branch(es), you can switch between them using _git checkout_: 
[[!format txt """
git checkout master
git checkout ooo-build-3-2-1
"""]]
_Note: You might want to keep the older ooo-build branches in separate locations.  When you have cloned ooo-build master to eg. ~/ooo-build, you can use the --reference feature of git clone to save bandwidth:_ 
[[!format txt """
git clone --reference ~/ooo-build \
    ssh://[username@]git.freedesktop.org/git/ooo-build/ooo-build ooo-build-3-2-1
cd ooo-build-3-2-1
git checkout -b ooo-build-3-2-1 origin/ooo-build-3-2-1
"""]]
_We recommend you to have the branch you are interested in as the only branch there:_ 
[[!format txt """
# remove the master branch in this repository, we are interested only in ooo-build-3-2-1
git branch -D master
"""]]

## Getting a particular tag

To switch your local repository to the given tag, use the following command: 
[[!format txt """
# let's say we want the tag OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3
git checkout -b tag-OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3 OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3
"""]]
This exactly means "please create a local branch tag-OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3 that shows the state of the sources when the tag OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3 was created".  For the operations like diff, log, etc. you don't have to create the branch; just directly do 
[[!format txt """
git log OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3
git diff OOO_BUILD_3_0_99_3 master
"""]]
The tags are created for released sources, branches or some specific commits.  To list them all, use: 
[[!format txt """
# ensure that you have all the tags from the remote repository
git pull -t
# show the tags
git tag
"""]]

## Getting the latest updates

We use the same git workflow as described in the [[common freedesktop.org git instructions|Infrastructure/git/Developers]].  The reasoning is simple - using just the _git pull_ (without the _-r_) tends to create too many unnecessary 'merge' commits when there are more people working on one repository - and this is what we want to avoid. 

So, to get the updates, use 
[[!format txt """
git pull -r
"""]]
Please, **do not forget the _-r_ !** - _-r_ means that instead of merging, _git pull_ rebases your local changes against the changes from the remote repository.  See also the [[Pushing the changes|Software/ooo-build/GettingIt]] section. 

_Note: Using rebase might be dangerous, and can lead to a situation when you seemingly lose a commit.  Don't worry, nothing is lost with git - after the finished git pull -r do the following:_ 
[[!format txt """
# let git search for the lost commits
git fsck --lost-found
# show them all, together with the patches
git show `cat .git/lost-found/commit/*`
# find the commit ID in the git show, and create a temporary branch
git checkout -b tmpbranch the_ID_you_just_found
# now you have the commit in tmpbranch, and you can do what you need
# (eg. another rebase, or something)
"""]]

## More info

* [[I have the ooo-build sources. What next?|Software/ooo-build/]] 
* [[git home page|http://git-scm.com/]] 
* [[ooo-build SVN to git cheat sheet|Software/ooo-build/SVNToGitCheatSheet]] 
* [[freedesktop.org git instructions|Infrastructure/git/Developers]] 
* [[freedesktop.org git repo administration|Infrastructure/git/RepositoryAdmin]] - personal repositories, etc. 
* [[Pro Git|http://progit.org/book/]] - the Git book 