

# D-Bus Interface: Cards

[[(Back to the toplevel D-Bus Interface page)|Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/Developer/Clients/DBus]] 

Objects and their interfaces: 

* /org/pulseaudio/core1/cardX 
      * - org.PulseAudio.Core1.Card - org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties - org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable. 

## org.PulseAudio.Core1.Card


### Properties


#### Index

* Type: Uint32 
* Access: read 
The card index. 


#### Name

* Type: String 
* Access: read 
The card name. 


#### Driver

* Type: String 
* Access: read 
The driver that implements the card object. This is usually expressed as a source code file name, for example "module-alsa-card.c". 


#### !OwnerModule

* Type: ObjectPath 
* Access: read 
The module that owns this card. It's not guaranteed that any module claims ownership; in such case this property does not exist. 

* Errors: 
      * - [[org.PulseAudio.Core1.NoSuchPropertyError|Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/Developer/Clients/DBus/Errors]] if this card is not owned by any module. 

#### Sinks

* Type: [ObjectPath] 
* Access: read 
The sinks belonging to this card. 


#### Sources

* Type: [ObjectPath] 
* Access: read 
The sources belonging to this card. 


#### Profiles

* Type: [ObjectPath] 
* Access: read 
All available card profiles. May be empty. 


#### !ActiveProfile

* Type: ObjectPath 
* Access: read/write 
The currently active card profile. This property doesn't exist if the card does not have any profiles. 

* Errors: 
      * - [[org.PulseAudio.Core1.NoSuchPropertyError|Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/Developer/Clients/DBus/Errors]] if this card doesn't have any profiles. 

#### !PropertyList

* Type: {String -> [Byte]} 
* Access: read 
The card's property list. 


### Methods


#### !GetProfileByName

* Arguments: name : String 
      * - name: Profile name 
* Returns: profile : ObjectPath 
      * - profile: Card profile object 
Find the card profile with the given name. 

* Errors: 
      * - [[org.PulseAudio.Core1.NotFoundError|Software/PulseAudio/Documentation/Developer/Clients/DBus/Errors]] if no such profile is available. 

### Signals


#### !ActiveProfileUpdated

* Parameters: profile : ObjectPath 
      * - profile: Activated card profile 
The active card profile was changed. 


#### NewProfile

* Parameters: profile : ObjectPath 
      * - profile: Added profile object 
A profile was added to the card. 


#### ProfileRemoved

* Parameters: profile : ObjectPath 
      * - profile: Removed profile object 
A profile was removed from the card. 


#### !PropertyListUpdated

* Parameters: property_list : {String -> [Byte]} 
      * - property_list: The new property list. 
The card's property list was modified. 
