

# Creating new XKeyboardConfig compat/geometry/keycodes/keymap/rules/semantics/symbols/types

(Warning this guide is incomplete, you might also want to check the links at [[the main page|Software/XKeyboardConfig]].) 


## Basics


### What does XKeyboardConfig do ?

XKeyboardConfig (also referred to as xkb) is responsible for making sure your pressed key on your keyboard produces the desired letter or symbol. For example, if I press the 'A' key I wish for a 'A' to appear on my screen and not a 'Q'. 


### xkb concepts

When a key is pressed on a keyboard it generates a code. The codes it generates are called the keycode. 

The keycodes have to be translated to symbols such as: A @ Ω. This information is stored in the symbol files. 

Keyboards have different layouts, keys, key shapes and key location. This information is stored called geometry. 

Finally a keymap is a set of symbols, modifiers, geometry to form a working keyboard. 

(The following terms are missing from this introduction: types, compatibility maps, rules and semantics) 


### Testing configurations

There are a few methods to load a keyboard config: 

* By command line: 
      * setxkbmap 
* By a gui: 
   * Gnome 
   * KDE 
(Note: the above list might not be complete.) 

Be warned: it is possible to load a broken keymap, preventing you to type. And easy way to prevent this is loading 2 keymaps at the same time. 


### Location the xkb config files

On this page the location of theses files will be referred to as $xkbdir$. The typical directories are: 

* /usr/share/X11/xkb/ 
(Note: the above list needs completion.) 

If all fails you can try to locate them by your favorite search application. Search for "semantics.dir". 


## Keycodes


## Symbols

We will make a new symbols configuration. We will name it $custom$ (for example 'test'). The next steps will be taken: 

* Create a new symbol file. 
* Write the content of the file. 
* Add the file to the list. 
* Load the file. 

### Creating a new symbol map

Create a new symbol file "$xkbdir$/symbols/$custom$". In our example case it would be the file "/usr/share/X11/xkb/symbols/test". 


### Writing a symbol file


### Adding the file to the list

There are 2 files you need to update: 

* $xkbdir$/rules/xorg.lst 
* $xkbdir$/rules/xorg.xml 

#### xorg.lst

This is the most simple and least complex file to update. Open the file and look for the string "! layout". Below that you see a list of layouts. Add your layout to it: 
[[!format txt """
  $custom$   $custom_full_name"
"""]]
For example: 
[[!format txt """
  test       My test layout"
"""]]

#### xorg.xml

This file is slightly more complex. Open the file and look for the string "<layoutList>" add your own layout here. (The variantlist and alternate language descriptions can be omitted.) 
[[!format txt """
    <layout>
      <configItem>
        <name>$custom$</name>
        <shortDescription>$shortdescription$</shortDescription>
        <shortDescription xml:lang="$languagecode$">$shortdescription_in$</shortDescription>
        <description>$description$</description>
        <description xml:lang="$languagecode$">$description$</description>
      </configItem>
      <variantList>
        <variant>
          <configItem>
            <name>$custom_variant$</name>
            <description>$description$</description>
            <description xml:lang="$languagecode$">$description_in$</description>
          </configItem>
        </variant>
      </variantList>
    </layout>
"""]]
* $shortdescription$ = A short description of your layout,for example: "USA". 
* $languagecode$ = the language code, for example "fr". 
* $shortdescription_in$ = Same as $shortdescription$ but in another language. 
* $description$ = A longer description of your layout, for example: "U.S. English" 
* $description_in$ = Same as $description$ but in another language. 

### Loading the symbols


#### Using command line

It's recommend to enable choosing between keyboards. If you haven't done so in your xorg.conf file you can still do it now. Run the command: `setxkbmap -option grp:ctrls_toggle` Possible alternative are: 

* grp:toggle 
* grp:alt_shift_toggle 
* grp:alts_toggle 
* grp:caps_toggle 
* grp:ctrl_alt_toggle 
* grp:ctrl_shift_toggle 
* grp:ctrls_toggle 
* grp:lalt_toggle 
* grp:lctrl_toggle 
* grp:lshift_toggle 
* grp:lwin_toggle 
* grp:menu_toggle 
* grp:rctrl_toggle 
* grp:rshift_toggle 
* grp:rwin_toggle 
* grp:shift_caps_toggle 
* grp:shift_toggle 
Now you can run the next command safely (without having to fear loosing your ability to type): 
[[!format txt """
setxkbmap -layout $your_default$,$custom$
"""]]
(And example of $your_default$ would be 'us'.) 

To get more error reports use: 
[[!format txt """
setxkbmap -layout $your_default$,$custom$ -v10
"""]]
or 
[[!format txt """
setxkbmap -layout $your_default$,$custom$ -print | xkbcomp - $DISPLAY
"""]]

### FAQ


## Geometry


## Keymap


## Rules


## Semantics


## Types


## Compat
