

## Migrating a CVS module to Git.

This page provides some instructions on how to migrate a module from CVS to git using the parsecvs utility (which desperately needs UI work). 


### Prepare the community

The first thing to do is pick a reasonable time to make the transition. A week before a major release of either X.org or the module itself is probably not the best plan. With a timeframe in mind, coordinate with other major maintainers of the module and select a target date. Send mail to your mailing list announcing your intention and include the proposed schedule. You should also remind developers of the expected sequence of events so no-one is surprised (or at least the surprise will be their fault for skipping over your carefully delivered email). Here's the usual sequence of events: 

1. Send migration warning email (this mail) 
1. Wait for selected date 
1. Make the CVS tree read-only 
1. Convert the tree using parsecvs 
1. Stick warning signs in CVS 
1. Push exported tree to kemper 

### Make CVS tree read-only

Ask an admin to make the CVS tree read-only on kemper, and make you a tarball of the repository. 


### Convert tree using parsecvs

OK, this tool is primitive, but handles our broken CVS bits better than git-cvsimport. 

1. Ensure edit-change-log (from parsecvs) is in your path. This script takes [[ChangeLog|ChangeLog]]-style commit messages and converts them to  plain text. 
1. Create a directory for the module, cd to it. 
1. Create an Authors file, similar to xorg-Authors in the parsecvs tree. 
1. Run the import process: 
   * find cvsrepodir/ -name '*,v' | parsecvs 
1. Verify the results 
   * gitk --all 
   * git-checkout master 
   * diff -r . <checkout of CVS head> 
1. Prepare the git tree for publication 
   * chmod +x .git/hooks/post-update 
   * fix up the update hook, chmod +x .git/hooks/update 

### Stick warning signs in CVS

1. Edit configure.ac in the CVS version, adding this just before the final AC_OUTPUT call: 

[[!format txt """
AC_MSG_ERROR([The $module is now maintained at:]
[    git://git.freedesktop.org/git/reponame]
[Please use that repository.]
"""]]
1. Temporarily make CVS writeable 
1. Commit change 

### Export git tree

1. Get the admins to create a [[new git repository|Infrastructure/git/RepositoryAdmin]] for you. 
1. `git push --force --all ssh://git.freedesktop.org/git/reponame` 