
This HTML page contains the basic install docs that can be found on [[http://moinmaster.wikiwikiweb.de/MoinMoin/InstallDocs|http://moinmaster.wikiwikiweb.de/MoinMoin/InstallDocs]]. It contains all necessary information to get your wiki up and running, even without being online. If you have a permanent internet connection, you might want to browse the docs on the Help``On``Installing page, which might contain more up-to-date information. 

After following the procedures on this page, you should have a working wiki and can browse the rest of the online docs there. 


## How to install your own MoinMoin Wiki

This page describes the installation procedure applying to [[!MoinMaster MoinMoin desc="MoinMoin"]] version 1.1 and up. In the next section, there is a list of real-world [[Installation Scenarios|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] that help you to understand how to apply the instructions in different environments. 

[[Basic Installation|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] explains the "`setup.py`" step of the installation in more detail. This applies equally to all scenarios, and you should read it before trying a live installation. 

[[Trouble-shooting|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] helps with fixing any general problems you might encounter, which apply to any installation platform. 

After a successful installation, you might want to read more about configuration and other options that you, as the wiki administrator, can set up. [[!MoinMaster HelpOnAdministration desc="HelpOnAdministration"]] contains links to pages that cover these topics. Especially, the [[!MoinMaster HelpOnConfiguration desc="HelpOnConfiguration"]] and [[!MoinMaster HelpOnUpdating desc="HelpOnUpdating"]] pages provide additional information regarding wiki setup and maintenance. [[!MoinMoin MoinMoinWinCvs desc="MoinMoinWinCvs"]] and [[!MoinMoin MoinMoinUnixCvs desc="MoinMoinUnixCvs"]] describe how to run your wiki using the current development version from the [[!MoinMoin SourceForge desc="SourceForge"]] CVS repository. 
[[!table header="no" class="mointable" data="""
 Please **make sure** that you do **not** accidently put your wiki's **`data/`** directory under a directory directly accessible by your web server (like below document root). Or at least forbid your web server serving anything below `data/` to a user - this is neither needed nor wanted! Your web server needs to serve moin.cgi and the stuff below htdocs **only**. 
"""]]

<a name="installscenarios"></a> 
### Sample Installation Scenarios

The following links lead you to concrete examples of installation sessions, showing the commands used and explaining what they do. It is highly recommended that you _first_ read the general information on installing (especially the next section of this page) before choosing an installation scenario that best fits your intended use of [[!MoinMaster MoinMoin desc="MoinMoin"]]. 

UNIX: 

* [[UNIX Installation|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
Windows: 

* [[Windows Installation using Apache|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
* [[Windows Installation using IIS|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
Mac OS X: 

* [[Mac OS X Installation|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
Long-Running-Process Setup: 

* [[FastCGI Setup using Apache|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
* [[mod_python Setup using Apache|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
* [[Setup using twisted|MoinMoin/InstallDocs]] 
<a name="basic-install"></a> [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/BasicInstallation" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="trouble-shooting"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/TroubleShooting" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="unix-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnUnix" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="win32apache-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnWin32" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="win32iis-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/InternetInformationServer" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="macosx-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/ApacheOnMacOsx" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="fastcgi-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/ApacheWithFastCgi" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="modpy-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/ApacheWithModPython" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 

---

 <a name="twisted-install"></a> 

---

 [[!inline pages="HelpOnInstalling/TwistedWeb" quick="yes" raw="yes"]] 
